the College of Education, who has been at Texas A&M
since 1970,
shortly after the college was formed. And Dean
Cole is going to share with me, I hope, some ideas,
some insights, some perceptions of all of the
things that have happened and all of the changes,
or at least some of them, but basically changes.
And that's one of the things I'm focusing on and on
the different administrations. I have a lot of
questions now after 653 organizational behavior
course about the structure of the organization. I
realize that I'm just somebody peeking in the
windows, and I don't have the whole picture
because I'm not intimately involved except in the
different roles that I've been involved. So there
are some questions, and I'll deal with those maybe
later and ask you about
leadership styles or conflict management even
just the management in general. But I know you're
very intimately aware. But anyway, basically,
you've seen the questions and you know what I'm
doing and why I'm doing it and the fact that I'm
really looking for something other than a true
history. I'm really wanting to find how people are
feeling and what kinds of things. And you have been
in a unique situation because you worked so
closely with Dean Hubert and you have worked
equally as hard as Dean Corrigan, and you're
there, and you're heavy into the
decision-making. So shall we talk about changes
first, Major? Write a book, do you realize that?
Why don't you? In your spare time? I've just spent
the last three weeks trying to put one little bitty
paper together that I'm presenting next week.
It's been an incredible amount of time. What's it
on? its own improved decision-making, as a matter
of fact. Good. Will you share anything? Sure. It
really is an outgrowth out of the... Actually,
what it is is 639, all in one paper. Wonderful. It's
a great course. It's still one of the best. It's
what I have finally gotten to do, exactly what I
asked you guys to do. That's great. I sure hope
you'll get through.
Well, all right. We started when the college
opened in 1969. It had evolved, you know, from the
Department of Education. But women was,
everybody's talking about the big change, the
impact of women in the college, okay? The focus and
the mission of the college has been and will be and
always had the teaching, the research, and the and
the service, maybe let's start with that. With how
has that, or has that changed in focus, or has the
focus of those, of that mission changed in any way
between the Pubert era and the Corrigan era, for
example?
The big difference between the early years, early
70s, and where we are today, is that we had a very
young faculty.
Just beginning, we had a few folks who were fairly
well established. But we had really come in
primarily as teachers, graduate level as well as
graduate level. And we were very immature. And I
don't mean that in a negative sense. I mean in terms
of development. We were very immature during that
time. And as we went through the early 70s, about
73, 74, when the big growth spokes began to hit,
through the late 70s, about a five-year span of 73
to 78, we were increasing in the college anywhere
from 11% to 14% a year for five years steadily. We
were the fastest growing college of education in
the country as far as we know. during that period of
time. We were going against national trends. As a
general rule, enrollment teacher education was
going down. Graduate enrollment was a slow growth
pattern. Undergraduate was phenomenal. There
was one year in the era that finances were good,
growth and everything else, that we added 10 new
positions in the college in one year. And that's 10
tenure track positions. Now, that hasn't
happened before or since. But there were a number
of years now where we had four to six new positions.
So during that mid-'70s period, it grew very
rapidly. And I think it's really a tribute to Dr.
Hubert and to Dr. Corbin, both. That first Dr.
Hubert, from the standpoint of moving that
quickly, plus with the institution itself, is
changing very dramatically at that time. that we
were able to maintain and, in fact,
have a cohesive goal toward which we were all
trying to move. We've gone from that immaturity of
people really focusing on what I would perceive as
a more common goal to whereas now, where we have a
common goal, we also have a large number of faculty
that that in a major college like we have here, you
have to have both kinds of folks. But at the same
time, each has to recognize the worth and the value
of both kinds. An undergraduate program with
2,500 students and that your bread and butter is
teacher education and put all your apples in the
research basket. Similarly, you can't have a
graduate program with a thousand kids and put all
your apples You've got to have a balanced program
and that's sometimes very difficult to maintain.
There are a lot of forces working both from that
university and from within the university more
toward the graduate area of exclusion. Well, not
exclusion, but the graduate program first
priority or maybe even second priority. And I
don't know that we need to say one is first and one is
second, but rather recognize that they're both
very important missions of the college and
recognize that both these resources are actually
complementary to each other rather than
exclusionary to each other. And I think that's a
tension that we have today much greater than we had
10, 15 years ago. Does it vary from department to
department? Yeah, it would have to, because we
have one, two, three departments that are almost
exclusively graduate. Of course, their emphasis
is going to be graduate. So we're really talking in
terms of those departments which have both
undergraduate and graduate programs. OK, which
only is about three. Well, it's actually for when
you consider Ed Psych. They don't have
undergraduate majors, but they do have a
tremendous undergraduate service
responsibility in terms of the introductory Ed
Psych course plus the special ed program. service
come in because I am hearing that a lot of
departments are saying we are the research
department and such and so and so is the service and
they don't do the research that we do and that kind
of thing. Where does service fit in? Service sort
of tags along and gets plugged in realistically
and is not a part of the somewhat advisedly. It is
and it isn't. You have a responsibility there But
you can't make it in service on its own. We like to
look at all three of them together and recognize
that everybody's going to have different roles
proportionately in each of the three areas. And I
think as 15 years ago, everyone pretty well
focused on the teaching role and some service role
and some research role, that emphasis has now
shifted to the research emphasis at third.
Ideally, those three would come together so that
your service would in fact be an extension of your
research and your admissions teacher education
by doing research and development work with the
schools. We would then also, at the same time, be
purposes or responding needs that they might
have. And then from that grows new information and
things that could be integrated into teaching. So
ideally, all three of them complement each other.
I guess that's a major way that we changed.
That's not inconsistent with the way higher
education in general typically changes. You
know, you started a teaching institution and the
profession of higher education is
hierarchically structured such that the epitome
of being a full professor is a researcher,
publisher, expert in the field, and so forth. This
is more toward graduate work than undergraduate
work. And then promotion and tenure and all of that
is always still, there's still that pressure, and
it's still based on your research. Well, and your
teaching, too. But that's what's more important.
Well, that's what the perception of the faculty
is. Where the dean has played, the coordinator has
played a very strong role in this. is trying to make
some kind of a balance in there, recognizing that
when you have a faculty of 175, 500 majors, that
there are many different roles within the college
that have to be played. And that not everyone needs
to, nor should, fit that research program. A
faculty of 175 total? That's headcount. That
includes health and PE lecturers. And EDCI has
100? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. No. Well, we were just
talking about, he must have been talking about
support staff. He said he had a staff, like, and
there was 100 people in his staff. Well, I applied
for my graduate students to graduate assistants
as well. Oh, okay. EDCI faculty were numbered
right about 40. Oh, okay. Regular tenure track
faculty, about 40. I see. I imagine that that's, I
can get that, those figures and all that, you know,
what the breakdown is by the department. Okay,
good. All right. Now, you have always taught,
right? You've always had some teaching
assignment limited or? Since 75. Okay. Has the
growth that we have experienced in the college
affected your ability to work with the students?
the time or the, you know, whatever. I should know
it. Well, it's interesting you should ask that.
This particular semester, because this semester
I'm teaching the foundations of secondary
education, and typically I would go to my classes
without two sections of 50 each. And just out of
sheer necessity, I had to open both those up to the
room. I had 66 kids, which I have seen where it's
definitely taken a toll on me in terms of my ability
to service that need. You still teach the graduate
course every semester? Yes, in the spring. Once a
semester? I mean, once a year. Yeah. OK. In terms of
the student affairs office,
the thing that has enabled us to really be
responsive to the kids, the single thing, I have a
database and knowledge of people who deal with
those things. There's no way that we could have
effectively given them the kids that we do deal
with. Good staff, obviously,
but in terms of just sheer numbers, we haven't
added a secretarial position in the student
affairs area in 12 years. How many years have you
been in this position? Since 1983. And I also was
acting in it the year that Dean Limbaugh was acting
dean, in between the Huber and the Corrigan,
during that year I was acting. And I went back for
one year as assistant dean. What about
collaboration? And being from the eighth floor,
looking down, and you can probably tell me more
about interaction between departments, more so
than among the departments, because I get that
probably from department heads as far as
collaborative work within their departments.
But how do you see that collaborative effort? And I
know the inquiry deals that Dean Corgan
instigated have been very helpful in that. What
else? Or how do you perceive it? Is it more or less? I
think overall it's more.
I'm not sure if you're able to look at it in 1969
dollars and 1987 dollars and build that inflation
factor. And I'm not sure if it would be more or not.
But because we have more faculty and so forth, it
certainly seems like we have more. And I know there
are more specific instances where faculty are
working across departments with each other. And
after that, it was limited.
The programs 15, 17 years ago were not that complex
either. It was fairly straightforward teacher
education.
We didn't have adult education or vocational
education. We did not have special education. We
just basically had straight elementary and
secondary certification. And then as our
knowledge base has increased, too, with respect
to teacher education, what it takes to support
that. Then the college has grown and adapted to it
and more people are involved in
cross-disciplines. It leads to where we have so
many non-traditional kinds of programs as well,
such as the Human Performance Lab and how to do
physical therapy and pre-nursing and
pre-occupational exercise technology. Okay.
What about perceptions of others of the college?
And certainly you've been here and have had a feel
for how this college is perceived by the others in
the university and then even in the more external
environment. Yeah, I've seen a lot of change in
that. I think the college has started out in a very
strong position within the university and has
maintained that strong position, and when I say
strong, in relationship to the other disciplines
of the university. Okay. Especially for a major,
especially since A&M has moved into the, quote,
major university research status, has
maintained a strong position because of our
roots. And that is, early on, Dr. Hubert was both
Dean of Liberal Arts, actually Dean of Arts and
Sciences. Right. and then Dean of Liberal Arts and
Dean of Education. He, in fact, had hired many of
the faculty in Arts and Sciences.
So established before it was even required what's
called the University Council on Teacher
Education. And that was an interdisciplinary
group housed in the College of Education, but
involved other faculty and other disciplines who
had responsibility for the teaching fields and
the content of the degree outside. Is that still in
effect? That's still very much in effect. Yeah,
it's a requirement now by NCAID and TEA that you
have this kind of a council. But it works here, I
think, much more effectively than in most
institutions because of the historical base. and
that we have so much tradition and so much history
of a very close relationship between the
disciplines and the College of Ed. I think because
also the number of our faculty, as that has
evolved, the kinds of faculty that we've been able
to recruit, and going back to your question on the
goal about interaction, interdisciplinary
kinds of things, the way that our people work with
others on campus has been able to maintain that
strong position, both realistically and in
perception.
I can say that we have always, from the higher
administration, been treated fairly. By that you
mean? In the allowance of resources and all of
that? Yeah. I think if you were to displace this
college of education in a similar institution
like a UT or what have you, that you'd see a major
difference in the kinds of resources that we have
been given and increasingly the kinds of
resources that we've got. Is that attributed more
to the leadership? Is the dean responsible for,
just like the department heads, you know, try to
get as many resources for their department. Is
that the same way with the deans trying to? I think
so, but he wouldn't be able to do that without
having the strong faculty and the strong programs
of the faculty of Shellock to do that. But you have
to have both there, and I think it's due to both.
Plus, we've had a central administration who has
seen the value in having a strong college
education. Has that changed from administration
to administration? Oh, yeah. Yeah. A lot?
Just, I mean. Where do we stand on these things?
I'll throw them out if you want me to. Well, you're
just going to have this stuff, right? OK. We're
probably in the most difficult period we've ever
been in right now. OK. Simply perception. Two
problems. A lack of knowledge of the role and scope
of the College of Education. Because of the number
of, because of the complexity of the institution
now. Right. A lack of interest, but a lack of...
Embodyment? Not being able to devote the amount of
time necessary to get up to speed and to learn what
needs to be learned. Because there's so many other
areas which the administration is familiar with,
they're already comfortable in those settings,
so it's much easier to go ahead in those settings.
To re-educate or re-educate? Yeah, and we're
talking ground zero. So, it's... Yeah, that's a
problem. That's a problem. But up until this time,
we've had really good support. I don't think we
have it now. But it takes a lot more effort on our
part to communicate.
Let me address outside. OK.
Inside the institution, we have gone from no
that there being very little of any perception
that we even have a college of education.
Literally what many superintendents and
principals and personnel directors say is that
now the best college of education is here. And in
fact, I get calls all the time telling me or asking
me, what can I do to recruit your kids? I want her
just like her. or two more just like him. He's
coming from a wide variety all over the state. Our
kids are in really good demand. Of course, a lot of
it has to do with the caliber of kid that comes in at
the beginning of the program. We like to think it's
all program A, but it's not. It's a combination of
the two. Our graduate students have gotten
placements. Our undergraduate students get very
good placements. And I think the perception has
been for the last few years and is that if you want
this program at any stage, you go to Texas Freshman
and transfer increase this year over last year was
54%. As a whole, we had a 9% increase, but if you take
the number of new freshman transfers,
One September 86 to one September 87 had a 54%
increase. One piece, if you're not familiar with
this, that I think is important for you to build in
at some point, Sylvia, and it's not related to
exactly what you're asking me, but I can give you a
chart which shows this. For the past eight years or
so, and I haven't gone back further than that, we
get our students particularly at the
undergraduate level in the College of Education,
was really interesting. Because for about the
last four years, we would start with a freshman
class in about 250 to 275, which represented
fairly consistently about 3%
of the total university freshman class. When that
class became a sophomore, it had grown to over 400.
It represented roughly 6% of that class at the
university. When that class became a junior, it
represented over 8% of that class at the
university, a number somewhere 600 to 700
students. When that class became a senior, It
represented anywhere from 10 to over 11 percent of
the university senior class and numbered in the
neighborhood of 9 to 9.50. And one of the things
that concerns me is that this year we had such a
significant increase in our freshman class. The
university had such a significant increase in its
freshman class. So if I'm looking at a higher
percentage right now as freshmen, what are we
looking at? And the trends will tell us that we'll
be looking at 10% to 11% of that senior class four
years down the road, which we'll have in the
neighborhood, could have in the neighborhood of
11 to 1,200 seniors. Well, how do you feel that all
this upheaval and this change, this drastic that
we're looking at in the whole teacher education
program is going to affect, because these will be
under the old program anyway, right? These that
entered this year will be in the same one. But
what's going to happen now? I mean, I know nobody
knows for sure, but how do you feel about what might
happen?
I'm torn between, one, wanting to control the
numbers, to be compatible with resources so we
have a quality program, with the other side that i
want to produce as many good teachers as we can
because our kids are getting a good experience are
being received well and are doing good jobs and i
don't want to cut back for equality's sake
supposedly and for some other reasons that might
help us here we're returning kids away to other
programs which they may or may not get as good
preparation plus I have some concern with the land
grant mission. On the other side, you can't
prepare everybody. Just like I was saying, I've
got 163 kids right now, and I have noticed, I've
commented several times on how I don't feel like I
have done as good a job in the classroom this time as
in the past. And that has a lot to do with my style in
terms of, because I like a lot of interaction. I've
been trying to know all my kids. I wind up knowing
none of my kids. That kind of thing. OK. Some of the
highlights, perhaps. And you were here as a
student. You got your master's and your doctorate
at Texas A&M. And then you also started working
here right after you graduated. Well, you were
working while you were getting the degrees. So
tell me how that changes. Because I haven't even
started doing anything with students yet. But
looking back now to your years as a student, And
then as it penetrated all the way to the top, how has
that evolved in your own perceptions? How do you
see it now versus how you saw it when you were a
student,
maybe? Yeah. As a student, I tended to see things
more simplistically, which in all bad. Well,
there probably were a lot simpler then, too, I
mean. Yeah. A lot of the issues were a lot simpler.
I think that we had some really good faculty back
then. I felt very good about my experience both at
the master's and the doctoral level. Some of those
same folks who were their strengths then are
still, you know, strengths today. Shoots, Steny
Johnson. Someone told me that 90%, and I was asked
to verify this, and I don't know why I have to go
through the document, that 90% of the people that
Dean Hubert, attributing the fact that he was so
astute in picking the right kinds of people for the
life, that 90% of the people that he had hired were
still here and were still productive. Does that
sound high? It wouldn't be too high. I mean, that's
going to be pretty close. And I can vouch for that.
Both he and Dean Corrigan Now they see, he saw and
Dean Corbin sees that the most important function
that Dean plays is in the recruitment and hiring
the very best faculty.
Without that, everything else just falls apart.
And so they both place heavy, heavy emphasis on
that. I know Dr. Hewlett many times. And Corgan,
too, just gnashed teeth over those decisions
because they don't look at it just as hiring an
individual, but rather as an investment in the
state, in the lives of our young people. Because if
you take a person today making a $30,000 or $40,000
decision
just to bring that person in, you're making in
excess of a million or two million dollar decision
over the life of that professor.
So when you couch it in those kinds of terms, and
particularly at the tenure point, that's really
when you're really assessing the value of that
individual to the program. Is the hiring still
done? you know, on recommendations from the
departments and the process. I had one teacher
say, you know, that if they were hired by Dean
Huber, just outright said, if you will not accept
that position, you just went to interview, you can
have a job here. And she says it was great, but in
thinking back, she says that's not the way it
should have been done because, you know, it should
be done by the department and what are the needs,
you know, that kind of thing. Was that just
something that happened once in a while or was it
just a... unusual yeah typically it he bobbed out
of the park recommendation
but his recommendation very strong and if that's
usually in other words now what is the process when
you're going to when you need a new position how
does that evolve a new tenure track position okay
the department heads will consult with their
faculty in terms of what that position is. Or if we
have a position where someone leaves, they may
want to take that position and redefine it. So it
starts with the definition of the position in the
department. And then that definition is shared
with the dean and massaged and looked at in light of
its compatibility with him a little bit or what
have you. That's agreed upon. And then the
departments advertise that position nationally
through the search process. And it's a faculty
search process. And typically, then, we'll bring
in three to four people. And then out of that two or
three day interview process, the one who stops on
that will be the dean. And then at the end of that
process, the department head or however the
department is structured, will get input from all
the different interview stops. Because
typically they involve faculty large group,
faculty small group, program area, one-on-one,
graduate students,
dean, phillips, as in faculties typically. And
they will synthesize all that input and then make
the determination. And also, they generally have
a seminar that they will give for faculty and
graduate students. Then the department head will
bring the faculty's record.